---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# DOM events

DOM events are signals generated by the browser to notify code of user
interactions or changes in the document. Examples include clicks, key presses,
and page loads. These events allow developers to create interactive and
responsive web applications.

## Basic Types of DOM Events

DOM events are categorized into several types, including:

- Mouse Events: `click`, `dblclick`, `mouseover`, `mouseout`, `mousemove`,
  `mousedown`, `mouseup`
- Keyboard Events: `keydown`, `keypress`, `keyup`
- Form Events: `submit`, `change`, `focus`, `blur`
- Window Events: `load`, `resize`, `scroll`, `unload`

## Handling

To respond to DOM events, you use event handlers, which are functions that
execute when a specific event occurs.

### Adding Event Handlers

`element.addEventListener(eventType, eventHandler, [options])`

```javascript
function handleClick() {
  alert('Button clicked!');
}

button.addEventListener('click', handleClick);
```

### Removing Event Handlers

`element.addEventListener(eventType, eventHandler, [options])`

```javascript
element.removeEventListener('click', handleClick);
```

## Event Propagation

Event propagation determines the order in which event handlers are executed.
Bubbling. The event starts from the target element and bubbles up to the
ancestors. By default, all event handlers are executed on this phase. Capturing:
The event starts from the root and captures down to the target element. To
execute the event handler on this phase, you need to add `{ capture: true }` (or
just `true`) as the third argument.

```javascript
element.addEventListener('click', eventHandler, true);
```

## Event Delegation

Event delegation leverages event propagation to manage events efficiently.
Instead of attaching event handlers to multiple child elements, you attach a
single handler to a common ancestor.

```javascript
document.getElementById('parent').addEventListener('click', function (event) {
  if (event.target && event.target.matches('childSelector')) {
    // Handle the event
  }
});
```

This technique is useful for dynamically added elements. Additionaly, it reduces
memory usage and improves performance, especially in applications with many
dynamic elements.

## Preventing Event Handling

You can prevent default behavior and stop event propagation using some methods
of Event object

- `event.preventDefault()` Stops the default action associated with the event.
- `event.stopPropagation()` Prevents the event from bubbling up or capturing
  down the DOM hierarchy.
- `event.stopImmediatePropagation()` Prevents other listeners of the same event
  from being called.
